---
title: A Challenging Project
layout: post
tags: ['javascript','work']
intro: "I recently completed a contract to build a web application where I was not allowed to use any open-source tools/code.
I want to share my thoughts now before I forget everything I learned."
date: 2015-10-04
---

My employer won a contract that needed someone who could build a web application and I was picked to build the app on-site at the client’s facility. I can’t provide specifics as to the name of the client, what exactly I was building or how any code or UI interfaces looked. The contract wasn’t finalized for a few months but during that time I repeatedly asked for requirements or a general idea of what I was supposed to build. The client only provided a vague idea that a web app for an embedded device needed to be made. The web app would allow a user to control settings on the embedded device. Most likely a tablet would be used since the embedded device would be indoors or outdoors and required a portable solution.

I think almost four months passed before I could actually go on-site to the client’s facility and actually start working. I had to sit in a static sensitive lab. I had to wear a lab coat and a static wrist band thing and complete some training to make sure I knew how to handle static sensitive equipment. There were no cubicles there were desks arranged against walls. The temperature in the lab was always low around 15 &#176;C (60 &#176;F) and I would wear thermal garments to keep myself comfortable.

I read the requirements that the client created and the requirements explained enough about the different user types and what each user role was allowed to do. I started generating some visual guides for myself to track which functions overlapped with different roles and also get a sense of how much each role could accomplish. I figured I would start with one role, building feature by feature for that role and figure out what each unique feature depended on to actually work. I wanted to spend some time plotting out what was missing from the requirements and start explaining through documentation how the application would work. 

There were no requirements for a server on the embedded board. The server was not taken into consideration by the client when they wrote the requirements. The client had no prior experience with web applications, this was all new territory for them. I thought I could start writing out what the web UI would need from the web server and basically explain the entire loop from UI to the server to functionality on the embedded board.

There were other engineers from my company working with me but they were writing code for the embedded device. The client had a few of their own engineers to work on the embedded board and in total we were a small group with each person focusing on their own thing. During our first group meeting we all listed what tools or things we needed, and when I asked if I could get Node.js installed on the workstation assigned to me the software lead in turn asked if Node.js was open sourced and I replied that it was. Immeadietly Node.js was rejected because it was open-source, and he asked if there was a paid alternative. As far as I know there isn't a paid alternative to Node.js. I asked if I could use any JS libraries to help me build they app, and a blanket rejection of all open-source was declared. 

Open-source was rejected because the client would need to submit all code to their IT group for technical review to determine if the code produced any risk to the security of the company and the project, and such a review would take too long so they didn’t even want to bother with it. I asked if I could use the laptop assigned to me by my company to build the web app, and that was rejected because of some technical rules where contractors on-site had to use workstations belonging to the client.

I had to build a web app using plain JavaScript which isn’t impossible but it doesn’t make much sense. I’m writing a lot of code just to get me close enough to start writing the code to fulfill the requirements the client created. I was not allowed to even download and run any JS unit testing library, the client told me to write my own unit testing framework. Then the question is how to do I unit test my unit test framework? I didn't write any unit tests because writing a unit test framework from scratch with the time allocated to build the web app would have lead to failure.

I did inform my employer that the constraints imposed on me by the client don’t really help when building a web application. I added that it would make more sense for the web app to be built off-site away from the client and delivered to them. My employer tried hard to amend the contract but the client wouldn’t have any of it. There client wanted to manage the software effort on-site instead of leaving it up to a contractor. Which I understand but when the environment on-site does not really lend towards building web applications then the client needs to adjust their rules or let someone else build the product.
